Dear friends, I am happy to address and interact with the Faculty members, Research Scholars and students of SN Bose National Centre for Basic Science, Kolkata. My greetings to all of you. I realize the research in basic sciences is the mission of SN Bose National Centre. Particularly, SN Bose National centre is involved in multiple activities in theoretical and experimental research such as condensed matter physics, mathematical and statistical physics, and quantum theory, high energy physics, nano science technology, astrophysics, quantum theory and quantum optics. Your institution is wearing a great name of a great scientist. Prof SN Bose is best known for his work on quantum mechanics in the early 1920s, providing the foundation for Bose?Einstein statistics and the theory of the Bose?Einstein condensate. Friends, I have visited Bose-Einstein Laboratory at ETH, Zurich. At ETH, I saw the work on Bose-Einstein condensate, a gas of atom and molecule that has been so chilled and their motion is virtually halted. The condensate was predicted by Albert Einstein in 1924 based on the system on system of quantum statistics formulated by Indian mathematician physicist Satyendra Nath Bose. Since, you will know about discovery of Higgs Boson, I will only say, the particle was boson because a scientist Satyendra Nath Bose first wrote to Albert Einstein about the existent of such particle in landmark paper. I am sure, SN Bose Centre will have the famous correspondence between Einstein and SN Bose. I would like to congratulate SN Bose National Centre for Basic Science, Kolkata for publishing 600 research papers in four years. Today when I am in the midst of researchers and scientific community, I would like to discuss few thoughts on the topic Science is reciprocating.

Sustainable Competitiveness for India

When I was studying the Global innovation Index report for the year 2012, I found that as per Global Innovation Index, Switzerland is ranked 1; Sweden 2; Singapore 3; Finland 4; UK 5; Netherlands 6; USA 10; Germany 15; Russia 51; Thailand 57 and India is in 64th ranking. But the Innovation Efficiency Index ranking efficiency Score for the Top 10 countries; China has achieved 1.13; India has attained 1.10; Switzerland 1.01; Netherlands 0.92.


The relationship between the GII (Global Innovation Index), and the efficiency ratio is positive, as expected, implying that more efficient countries achieve, on average, better GII scores. The top 10 countries in the Innovation Efficiency Index are countries particularly good at surmounting relative weaknesses on their Input Sub-Indices, with robust output results. There is a relationship between innovation index and competitiveness. The Global Competitiveness Index 2012-2013 has ranked Switzerland 1; Singapore 2; Finland 3; Sweden 4; USA 7; Japan 10; Canada 14; Australia 20; China 29; Indonesia 50; India 59. India is 64 in Global Innovation index, our ranking in global competitiveness index is 59 in 2012-13. If India has to graduate from the present ranking in competitiveness index of 59 and become equal to economically developed nations (within the top 10), as per GCI Report we should note that India have to focus on 12 pillars of Competitiveness: First 4 pillars such as Institutions, Infrastructure, Macroeconomic environment, Health and primary education ? the key for these pillars depends on factor-driven economy; The next 5 pillars such as Higher Education and training, Goods market efficiency, labor market efficiency, Financial market development, Technological readiness and market size ? the key for these pillars are depends on efficiency driven economies; The last 2 pillars such as Business Sophistication and Innovation - are depends on the key factor called innovation-driven economies. For all these parameters the basic foundation for any nation is depends on the strength of the scientific research and the technologies driven out of those parameters such as innovation and efficiency.


The ultimate objective is to achieve Sustainable competitiveness, which reflects the search for a development model that would balance economic prosperity, environmental stewardship, and social sustainability. The sustainable competitiveness depends on how the set of institutions, policies, and factors that make a nation remain productive over the longer term while ensuring social and environmental sustainability.


The present economic growth for the last decade has been achieved by the use of technologies essentially developed elsewhere based on scientific discoveries and patents generated before 10 to 15 years. In all the top branches of basic sciences and technology we are only followers. We are 3rd or 4th country to achieve a particular breakthrough. I call this as a 5th country syndrome. Now are our mission is to overcome this syndrome and be the pioneer in scientific research. Definitely, latest technologies resulting from latest scientific results are not available from developed countries to India at least for a decade. Hence, research is very vital, particularly, basic science which will result in the latest technology required for meeting Global Competitiveness by Indian organizations, institutions and industry. Institutes like SN Bose National Centre for Basic Science with a rich heritage in research and human resource development in basic sciences and technology research, can contribute extensively in uplifting the country's status in innovation and competitiveness.

Defining scope of research

The doctoral students are the prime movers for such mission, because they can work in the cutting edge of science and technology, improve the innovation index and competitiveness index of any nation. Hence, your work is an important catalyst for national development and for fulfilling the international social responsibility. This would need certain key parameters with which every researcher should formulate his or her problem which includes:


a)	SN Bose Centre would like to be known for its pioneering research at least in five areas of science and technology. All of you should work for bringing the excellence in every field you work. 
b)	Convergence of technology is becoming an important area of science and technology. In the present mode of convergence in science is already taking place between bio-nano-info and ecology. This aspect has to be kept in mind by all the researchers of this centre. 

Let me now discuss with on how science is reciprocating.

Four dimensional Convergence of technologies

The information technology and communication technology have already converged leading to Information and Communication Technology (ICT). Information Technology combined with bio-technology has led to bio-informatics. Similarly, Photonics is grown out from the labs to converge with classical Electronics and Microelectronics to bring in new high speed options in consumer products. Flexible and unbreakable displays using thin layer of film on transparent polymers have emerged as new symbols of entertainment and media tools. Now, Nano-technology has come in. It is the field of the future that will replace microelectronics and many fields with tremendous application potential in the areas of medicine, electronics and material science. I am sure about the use of nano-robot for drug delivery.


When Nano technology and ICT meet, integrated silicon electronics, photonics are born and it can be said that material convergence will happen. With material convergence and biotechnology linked, a new science called Intelligent Bioscience will be born which would lead to a disease free, happy and more intelligent human habitat with longevity and high human capabilities. Convergence of bio-nano-info technologies can lead to the development of nano robots.


Nano robots when they are injected into a patient, my expert friends say, it will diagnose and deliver the treatment exclusively in the affected area and then the nano-robot gets digested as it is a DNA based product. I saw the product sample in one of the labs in South Korea where best of minds with multiple technology work with a target of finding out of the box solution.


Science is reciprocating: Let me give an example. Last year, I was in the Harvard University where I visited laboratories of many eminent professors from the Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. I recall, how Professor Hongkun Park, showed me his invention of nano needles, which can pierce and deliver content into individual targeted cells. That?s how nano particle sciences is shaping the bio sciences. Then I met Professor Vinod Manoharan, who showed on the other hand bio sciences is in turn shaping nano material science as well. He is using DNA material to design self assembling particles. When particular type of DNA is applied on a particle at the atomic level, he is able to generate a prefixed behavior and automatic assembly from them. This could be our answer to self assembly of devices and colonies in deep space without human intervention as envisioned by Dr K Erik Drexler. Thus, within a single research building, I saw how two different sciences are shaping each other without any iron curtain between the technologists. This reciprocating contribution of sciences to one another is going to shape our future and industry needs to be ready for it. Friends are you ready to bring down the iron curtain existing between various technological groups.


Now, a new trend is emerging. The aspect being introduced is that of Ecology. Globally, the demand is shifting towards development of sustainable systems which are technologically superior. This is the new dimension of the 21st century knowledge society, where science, technology and environment will have to go together. Thus, the new age model would be a four dimensional bio-nano-info-eco based.

Research results from my PhD student

Friends, let me now share the research results on mentally challenged children carried out by my student Fr AK George for his Ph.D work. He has carried out ten scientific studies and worked out the guidance required to the nature of brain which helps one as to how to intervene with the brain for enhancing brain capabilities. Wiring together of neurons and firing in quick succession opens up vistas for creating high amount of connectivity in the brain. The need of providing challenge guides one to take the proper course of challenging the challenged brain to enhance its capabilities. The scientific study on feedback brings forth the need of positive as well as negative feedback in guiding the brain to right behavioral pattern. Shortening of paths by practice underlines the need of repetitions in the case of mentally challenged children. The role of both the hemispheres in execution of task, points to the need of training both the hemispheres. The role of proper exercises to wire the brain underlines the need of having the proper exercises to enhance the brain capabilities. 

On 17 September 2012, I addressed the members of International Association of Preventing Blindness wherein I brought out the research areas, particularly in nano-technology.

Research Areas

Nanotechnology is finding large-scale application in drug delivery systems, biomedical application and nano structure and devices. The low dimensionality of many nano-structures, in which electrons are free to move in only two, one or even zero dimensions, has a profound effect on their chemical, electronic and optical properties. The practical application of these effects is only just beginning to be realized in such devices as lasers based on quantum wires and quantum dots. By using quantum behavior, researchers can tailor the basic characteristics of the materials and devices to achieve greater efficiency, faster speeds and high packing density devices for electronic, photonic, catalytic, magnetic and biomedical applications. For example, a neural stimulatory micro-system requires fairly uniform nano-sized electrode arrays for focal stimulation of neural tissue for the treatment of blindness. For Example, Using nanotechnology research, ophthalmologists can find innovative treatment methods for glaucoma. 

There are some leading research initiatives in the world, which give promising hope in the treatment of glaucoma, where convergence of technologies plays a major role: -


1.	Applied nanotechnology aimed at the regeneration and neuro protection of the central nervous system (CNS) will significantly benefit from basic nanotechnology research conducted in parallel with advances in related biological sciences. (Surgical Neurology 63 (2005) 301 - 306)

2.	People with colour blindness induced by damage to the optic nerve have had their vision partially restored with the help of an implanted nanoscale scaffold that has encouraged nerve tissue to regrow. (The New Scientist 13 March 2006) 

3.	Optic nerve regeneration is the key to partially reverse blindness from glaucoma. Intensive research is needed. 

4.	Approach through the traditional medicine route is another method to find a treatment regime for glaucoma. For example; the extract of the leaves of the Chinese tree Ginkgo biloba, while Indians lay their hopes on Ashwagandha of Ayurveda for treatment of glaucoma. We need in depth work on these and similar approaches.


After listening to my talk, one of the participants gave the following comments. "Thank you sir for your diligent efforts and interest and of course the fantastic speech at the 9GA by IAPB. I especially liked you putting up the context of implementing bio-polymers and the free electron/deficit concept which can revolutionize biological transplants and regeneration in years to come. I personally will strive to accomplish some part of your ideology as they are similar to mine."

Missions for Scientists

Let me share with you certain scientific challenges that need integrated solution to enrich the life of the people of our planet, particularly our nation. 

1.	In the energy sector, increasing the solar photovoltaic cell efficiency from the existing 15% to 45% using silicon as a base with Carbon Nano Tube is an important research challenge. 

2.	India has to go for nuclear power generation in big way using thorium based reactor. 

3.	Proteomics research is an important area. It would lead to the disease characterization, diagnosis and drug discovery. 

4.	An integrated vaccine development prevention of HIV/AIDS disease, leading to production in three years time. 

5.	Stem cell research through three areas such as Adult stem cells, umbilical cord stem cells, and embryonic stem cells on a mission mode for finding cure for many diseases.

6. During my recent visit abroad, I found serious research in forecasting onset of earthquake in the countries; Iceland, Ukraine and Russia by young scientists. It is essential India has to work on mission mode research for forecast the earthquake using multiple parameters using precursors such as pre-shock conditions, electromagnetic phenomena prior to final rupture and atmospheric and ionospheric anomalies. 

7.	Extensive research to ensure a validated prediction system to assess the quantum of rainfall in a particular area for a particular cloud condition within a specified duration.

Conclusion: What I will be remembered for?

Friends, to be here with you today for me is a beautiful experience. To quote Alfred Tennyson "For men may come and men may go, But I go on forever", this centre will radiate knowledge as ever. When I see every one of you, I am convinced that our nation has tremendous future. Your journey will be a journey of discovery, a journey of courage and above all the journey of nation building. Like the perennial river of knowledge, SN Bose National Centre for Basic Science will continue to be a reservoir of great visionaries.


Friends, finally I would like to ask you, what would you like to be remembered for? You have to evolve yourself and shape your life. You should write it on a page. That page may be a very important page in the book of human history. And you will be remembered for creating that one page in the history of the nation - whether that page is the page of invention, the page of innovation or the page of discovery or the page of creating societal change or a page of removing the poverty or the page of finding new technologies in energy or astronomy. I will be happy if you could write this page and mail it to me (apj@abdulkalam.com).


In this quest, I would like to give certain suggestions:
1.	Would you be remembered for evolving better photo voltaic cells which are efficient and minimum losses, thereby making solar energy an economical option for meeting our energy requirements? 

2.	Would you be remembered in finding a cost effective, safe and efficient solution for transmitting space solar energy into the earth and its effective utilization using nano-technology? 

3.	Would you be remembered for pioneering the human mission to inhabit the moon and the Mars? 

4.	Would you be the first to establish qualities the mass of neutrino and its origin? 

5.	Would you be remembered for bringing free and seamless bandwidth to all, particularly to the 700 million people living in the rural areas and application of ICT as a tool for removing poverty and enhancing the quality of life and delivery of healthcare?

6.	Would you be remembered for designing and implementing an education system which will transform every student to be a member of the knowledge society with value added skills or quality knowledge? 

7.	Would you be remembered for developing special algae species which can be used to extract bio-diesel and bio-petrol, thereby leading to faster realization of energy independence goals? 

8.	Would you be remembered for facilitating the evolution of leaders who are conscious of sustainable development of the nations and conservation of the ecosystem?

9.	Would you be remembered for developing an accurate disaster warning system against earthquakes and other natural disasters which can potentially save millions of lives?

10.	Would you be remembered for first one to answer the questions whether we are alone? 

I am sure, you will definitely be able to evolve a mission which is far reaching in terms of impact and the potential benefit it can bring to humanity and the planet. 

My best wishes to all the members of the SN Bose National Centre for Basic Science, Kolkata success in all your scientific missions. 

May God Bless you all.