Dear Friends, I am delighted to meet and interact with the Student Instructors from the Dharbanga, Madubhani and Supaul districts of Bihar to teach science through the mobile science laboratories setup by Viksit Bharat Foundation and Agastya International Foundation. I congratulate Shri MB Verma and Dr Ramji Raghavan for organising this Mega Science Fair. I also congratulate all the Principals and Teachers of all the schools who have encouraged the students for their participation. My greetings to all of you. Dear friends, when I see all of you, who are selected as the Student instructors, I find something unique in each and every one of you. Let me now talk to you on the topic "Mission of youth: Unique You".

Unique You

Dear friends, Look up, what do you see, the light, the electric bulbs. Immediately, our thoughts go to the inventor Thomas Alva Edison, for his unique contribution towards the invention of electric bulb and his electrical lighting system.

When you hear the sound of aeroplane going over your house, whom do you think of? Wright Brothers proved that man could fly of course at heavy risk and cost.


Whom does the telephone remind you of? Of course, Alexander Graham Bell. He suggested in 1905:

"Don't keep forever on the public road, going only where others have gone. Leave the beaten track occasionally and dive into the woods. You will be certain to find something you have never seen before. It will be a little thing, but do not ignore it. Follow it up, explore all around it; one discovery will lead to another, and before you know it, you will have something worth thinking about."


When everybody considered a sea travel as an experience or a voyage, a unique person questioned during his sea travel from United Kingdom to India. He was pondering on why the horizon where the sky and sea meet looks blue? His research resulted in the phenomena of scattering of light. Of course, Sir CV Raman was awarded Nobel Prize.


Do you know an Indian Mathematician who did not have formal higher education but had inexhaustible spirit and love for mathematics which took him to contribute to the treasure houses of mathematical research - some of which are still under serious study and engaging all-available world mathematicians' efforts to establish formal proofs. He was a unique Indian genius who could melt the heart of the most hardened and outstanding Cambridge mathematician Prof G H Hardy. In fact, it is not an exaggeration to say that it was Prof. Hardy who discovered a great mathematician for the world. This mathematician was of-course Srinivasa Ramanujan for whom every number was a divine manifestation.


Do you know about a man of science and about a life completely dedicated to innovation, creativity and scientific research. His most famous success was the astrophysical Chandrasekhar limit. The Chandra limit describes the maximum mass (greater than 1.44 solar mass) of a white dwarf star, or equivalently, the minimum mass for which a star will ultimately collapse into a neutron star or black hole following a supernova. The limit was first calculated by a scientist while on a ship from India to Cambridge, England. Yes, I am referring to Prof Subramanian Chandrasekhar, who lived his entire life for research, research and research on cosmos.


Friends, there was a great scientific lady who is known for discovering Radium. She won not one, but two Nobel Prizes, one for physics and another for chemistry. Who is she? She is Madam Curie. Madam Curie discovered radium and she was doing research on the effect of radiation on human system. The same radiation which she discovered, affected her and she sacrificed her life for removing the pain of human life.


Friends, I have, so far, met 15 million youth in India and abroad, in a decade?s time. I learnt, "every youth wants to be unique, that is, YOU! But the world all around you, is doing its best, day and night, to make you just "everybody else".

The challenge, my young friends, is that you have to fight the hardest battle, which any human being can ever imagine to fight; and never stop fighting until you arrive at your destined place, that is, a UNIQUE YOU! Friends what will be your tools to fight this battle.

Criteria for achievement for youth

How does achievement come? There are four proven steps; having an aim in life before 20 years of age, acquiring knowledge continuously, hard work towards the aim and perseverance to defeat the problem and succeed. Now you know, how the unique personalities got evolved and also you realize how to transform yourself into unique you. And above all, what you need a will power and confidence, that you can achieve great deeds. In this connection let me recall famous verses of 13th century Persian Sufi poet Jalaluddin Rumi:


Wings to Fly
"You were born with potential. 
You were born with goodness and trust. 
You were born with ideas and dreams. 
You were born with greatness. 
You were born with wings. 
You are not meant for crawling, 
so don?t, you have wings. 
Learn to use them to fly."


-	Jalaluddin Rumi
-	13th Century Persian Sufi Poet


My message to you, young friends, is that education gives you wings to fly. Achievement comes out of fire in our sub-conscious mind that "I will win". So, each one of you assembled here and elsewhere, will have "Wings of Fire". The wings of fire will indeed lead to knowledge which will make you to fly as a Doctor, or an Engineer, or a scientist, or a teacher, or a political leader, or a bureaucrat or a diplomat or anything you want to be.

Conclusion

Finally I would like to ask you, what would you like to be remembered for? You have to evolve yourself and shape your life. You should write it on a page. That page may be a very important page in the book of human history. And you will be remembered for creating that one page in the history of the nation - whether that page is the page of invention, the page of innovation or the page of discovery or the page of developing and deploying a vital system and products for the nation.


Dear student instructors, since you are all in the mission of teaching science to the students, I would like to recall a profound saintly message to all of us by Maharishi Patanjali 2500 years ago. 

"When you are inspired by some great purpose, some extraordinary project, all your thoughts break their bounds. Your mind transcends limitations, your consciousness expands in every direction, and you find yourself in a new, great and wonderful world. Dormant forces, faculties and talents come alive, and you discover yourself to be a greater person by far than you ever dreamt yourself to be."


With these words, let me greet all of you success in their mission of contributing using your unique core competence in science by achieving culture of excellence to teach the students to understand the science better for improving their education and research attitude among the school students. 

May God bless you.