Sustainable development refers to a mode of human development in which resource use aims to meet human needs while preserving the environment so that these needs can be met not only in the present, but also for the generations to come. Friends, world has so far seen the development, rapid development and social development, economic development and political development. But due to the dwindling of natural resources and burgeoning population leading to more than 7 billion in the world, today it is essential to think of sustainable development in every aspect of human life in every sector of the economy. So far, much of the data being generated by the nations using the technologies developed and knowledge acquired through various means of data collection over terrestrial as well as space communication periodically. I was asking myself, what we learn from so many terrestrial and mobile networks, satellites for remote sensing and communication, so many ground sensors, so many flight systems and so much of data received from various data capturing system. When we analyze the data what is the resultant that can be given to the rural population of 3 billion people to empower them with information, knowledge and wisdom to improve their own quality of life. I was thinking what will be the unique approach that will help to achieve sustainable development. I would like to propose an integrated solution for sustainable development through a unique model designed by me called "User Community Pyramid" which uses the convergence of technologies for bringing development to the people using natural resources optimally for the generations to come.


Friends, let me now give my visualization of the sustainable development model using the convergence of technologies for remote areas development including rural areas covering 3 billion population. A book - TARGET 3 BILLION has been evolved based on the above theme. 
I would like to present my visualization of User Community Pyramid structure linking the following:

1.	Natural Resources 
2.	Information and Communication 
3.	Convergence of Technologies 
4.	Societal Business model 
5.	Applications 
6.	Users 

Now let me discuss in detail on how to achieve sustainable development in a given User Community Pyramid (UCP).


What is the Objective of UCP?: There are many national initiatives at the ground level with the help of technologies to protect the environment and bring sustainable development. . Sustainability for safe drinking water and water for irrigation; reducing the pollution using technology and best practices; adopting more renewable energy resources to reduce the dependency on the fossil fuel; managing the mobile resources so that it does not affect the environment and lead to further deterioration of health and environment; and enrich the bio-diversity thereby bring peace and economic prosperity to the nation.

How to do that? Look at the bottom of the slide


Bottom of the pyramid: The users are called the bottom of the pyramid in the User Community Pyramid and they are the vital link for all economic activities and the beneficiaries of sustainable development. 

Resources: Natural resources are the basis for sustainable development. We have natural resources such as Sea, Land, Water, Rivers, mountain, forest and climate change. The Sustainable development in every aspect of the above is essential in promoting and protecting the environment. We have been using the natural resources for the human development using the science and technology and its applications. But at the same time, polluting the environment in the form of CO2 emission; deforestation; polluting the land, sea and river in the form of industrial, municipal waste; fertilizer. Today, natural resources are dwindling and the environment is polluted leading to global warming.


Convergence of Technologies: Today, due to the Convergence of technologies such as Bio-Info-Nano and Eco technologies, resulting into clean and green technologies leads to multiple products and systems in water, energy, environment, pollution, waste and biodiversity and healthcare.

For example, solar technologies have given the first 700 MW Solar park in Gujarat; nano filter technology has given the safe drinking water solutions; nano packaging and eco technologies has given the bio-degradable packaging solutions. Research and development is certainly progressing using the convergence of technologies which will give the clean and green products to the humanity. Now how to ensure that these technologies reaches the out reached using Information and communication technologies and evolving societal business model.


Information and Communication: Information collection, generation and dissemination through Communication network and its technologies over terrestrial and satellite networking has attained new dimension due to the convergence of Geo-Spatial technologies. This helps to monitor and track the natural resources, helps to plan for improving the environment and enriching the biodiversity. The information mining and its analysis will transform into knowledge. Information and Communications systems will collect data from the land and space through the terrestrial network and wireless technologies. The GIS, GPS and, Geo-spatial technologies using Satellite network may acquire and analyze the data from remote sensing, resource mapping on land, water and sea, movement and path of the river dimensions through the satellites such as Cartosat and Oceansat. Modern geo-spatial analytical tools may analyze the data from data mining of the wealth of data generated which may enrich the knowledge on how to bring sustainable development in multiple areas such as Waste, Pollution, Energy, Mobility and Biodiversity. Using the information and communication technologies, we need to evolve innovative societal business model so that the research results of convergence of technologies are used for human development in a sustainable way.


Societal business model: At one side, technology based systems development resulted out of scientific research; and at other side, evolving an innovative business model which will take the technologies to the users for creating sustainable development systems. Socio economic applications from the unique societal business model which will empower and enrich the users such as farmers, fishermen, skilled workers, people living in the rural areas. When the sustainable development societal business model is applied, that will result into the use of available natural resources optimally, recycle it without polluting the environment and at the same time make it available for the generations to come so that global peace and prosperity is assured.