Excellence in thinking and actions

I am born with ideas and dreams

I am indeed delighted to participate in the Children Science Congress at the 100th Indian Science Congress at SN Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Kolkata. My greetings to all of you. Dear young friends, what is the significance of this 100th Indian Science Congress. This means; as you all know, the dynamics of the sun and its planets. We belong to one of the eight planets of the Sun, the earth. The planet earth, while rotating his own axis everyday, the earth itself orbit around the sun. One orbit around the sun which takes nearly one year. That means; earth with Indian Science Congress has orbited around the sun 100 times and my hearty congratulations to all the participants, particularly young scientists. Dear friends, this Indian science congress standing on the shoulders of great scientific minds SN Bose, JC Bose, Meghnath Saha, Sir CV Raman, Srinivasa Ramanujan, Homi Bhabha and Vikram Sarabhai and many great scientists. When I am in the midst of young future scientists, I would like to share few thoughts on the topic "Excellence in thinking and actions".


Dear young friends, when I see you all in Children Science Congress of 100th Indian Science Congress, I was asking myself two questions. One is; what are the unique traits, aspiring young scientists should possess. The second one is; how many of you from this large gathering will take science as a life time mission. Let me touch on the first one.

Unique traits for aspiring young scientist

1.	Science born out of human curiosity turning into question - question - question till you get an answer either theoretically or experimentally or both. The question is, you young guys; how many of you have that characteristics? 

2.	Excellence in thinking and action is the foundation for scientific research. What is excellence? Friends, you all belong to a student community which should stand for a culture of excellence. And excellence is not by accident. It is a process, where an individual, (or organization or nation,) continuously strives to better oneself. The performance standards are set by themselves, they work on their dreams with focus and are prepared to take calculated risks and do not get deterred by failures as they move towards their dreams. Then they step up their dreams as they tend to reach the original targets. They strive to work to their potential, in the process, they increase their performance thereby multiplying further their potential and this is an unending life cycle phenomenon. They are not in competition with anyone else, but themselves. That is the culture of excellence. I am sure; each one of you will aspire to become unique with culture of excellence.

My interaction with students in State Children Science Congress (2012)

Dear young friends, before reaching you, the Children Science Congress of the Indian Science Congress, Kolkata, I participated in the Uttar Pradesh State Science Congress at Barabanki, Southern Regional Science Congress at Coimbatore, Tamilnadu, Mega Science Fair at Darbhanga (Bihar) and National Children Science Congress at Varanasi. Let me share with you my experience in receiving questions and interaction with various young minds.


On 27 December 2012, I participated in National Children's Science Congress at Varanasi. I addressed young scientists with the topic I want to become a scientist. At the end of the talk, I interacted with the young students, one student asked me a searching question; Mr Kalam, basically I am good student. I learn and understand the lessons what teachers taught. Unfortunately, whenever the real examination time started nearing, I slowly loose the confidence in me and the performance in the exam. It has reflected recently in my life. Mr Kalam please tell me, how can come out of this situation and have confidence in me. It was pin drop silence in the auditorium. This question has shaken many young minds, how I do answer. I looked at the learned dais members in such of answers. But silence - silence everywhere including the thousands of young scientists in the auditorium. Then I asked all the young scientists and audience, repeat with me, what I am going to say: slowly I started reciting line by line and all the thousand, including the student who had a question. The name of the poem "I will fly and fly".


I will fly and fly
-	"I am born with potential. 
-	I am born with goodness and trust. 
-	I am born with ideas and dreams. 
-	I am born with greatness.
-	I am born with creativity.
-	I am born with confidence.
-	I am born with courage, 
-	I am born with wings, 
-	So, I am not meant for crawling, 
-	I have wings, I will fly 
-	I will fly and fly"



When the boy repeated this song of confidence, smile radiated from the face of the boy and he said, "Daily I will recite this poem - I will fly".

Friends, on 24th December 2012, I interacted with the students at Mega Science Fair, Darbhanga (Bihar), one village boy asked me a question in Hindi; Kalam sahib, "I want to fly myself like a bird, how can I do it". I told him, nothing is impossible. My teacher Prof. Satish Dhawan has made a research on hundreds types of bird and calculated the speed at which the various types of birds flight and also aerodynamic data drag and lift graphically. My professor concludes the birds fairly light ? weight and their body shape aerodynamically. However, the man's weight is high and he is aerodynamically badly designed. Only way, he may need assisting device small wings. With high energy generated with enthusiasm and assisting device man can fly one day. I told the young fellow of a village and came from Darbhanga. You are a light fellow. With minimum assisting device like a flapping wing, one day you will fly.


In Uttar Pradesh State Science Congress at Barabanki, one girl student asked me, Mr Kalam, tell me in an understandable way, what is God?s particle, how it is going to help us? I answered the question which I would like to share with you. 

Discovery of Higgs Boson: Friends, as young scientist, you may have followed the recent development by two teams at the CERN Laboratory towards the discovery of the God?s Particle, a popular name for an elementary particle called Higgs Boson, named after a great scientist Peter Higgs.


Its existence is predicted by the Standard Model to explain why other elementary particles have mass. Friends, the Standard Model of Physics is a theory concerning the electromagnetic, weak, and strong nuclear interactions, which mediate the dynamics of the known subatomic particles. While this model is able to explain many physical phenomena and particles, it did not explain some fundamental questions - How does an infinitely dense universe become a vast and spacious one? And how is it filled with matter? In theory, as the early universe expanded, energy should have condensed into equal amounts of matter and antimatter, which would then have annihilated each other on contact, reverting to pure energy. On paper, the universe should be empty. But we all know it is filled with billions of galaxies, stars, planets and mostly filled dark matter and material!


This puzzle can perhaps be solved once the scientific teams are able to establish the existence of the Higgs Boson, which would be the "mass giving" fundamental particle of the universe. Already some progress is being made in this direction in 2011, and it may be possible that within the next few year, we would be able to understand better about the God?s Particle and unravel the mystery of why matter exists and how universe came into being. I am sure, some of you, as scientists of tomorrow would be finding such sub-atomic, fundamental physics as a research area for your scientific pursuits and would play a vital role in discovering more about this unique area of particle physics.


When I addressed Southern Regional Science Congress at Coimbatore, Tamilnadu, one student started, he said "my teacher today told me that the Sun has got eight planets, only earth has got life and life supporting system for thousands of species. Tell me Mr Kalam, why not other seven planets of our Sun not habituated. I asked the student, what his name and in which class studying. He said, my name is Sarvanan and studying in 10+2. My answer to the student was; actually this has been question answered in beautiful way long-long ago by Issac Newton himself, the discoverer of gravitational law. Newton said, "the only miracle is the earth at an unique distance, gets required warmth and light from the Sun". Let me answer further to your question. What is the environment of other planets?


I said, dear young friend, do you know that on Jupiter, three times the size of the earth, a powerful hurricane has been raging for the past 400 years: on Neptune wind speeds reach up to 3200 km per hour, that is over 10 times higher than the strongest gusts mustered by Katrina or Tsunami winds India's experienced. On Mars, the dust stormed continuously engulfs part of the planet. On Saturn's Moon Titan it rains liquid methane and Venus is chocked by a thick smoggy blanket of sulfuric acid. Any species, is it possible such an environment? Scientific debates going on, but fortunately none of these happen on our planet earth and we are safe.


The second question in my mind, as you all know, how many of you will take science as a life time mission. Here I would like to give a life time story of great ones and how to become unique you.

Unique you

It is said, "History has proven that those who dare to imagine the impossible are the ones who break all human limitations. In every field of human endeavor, whether science, medicine, sports, the arts, or technology, the names of the people who imagined the impossible and achieved are engraved in our history. By breaking the limits of their imagination, they changed the world."


Of course, it is true in India, Sir CV Raman who gave the theory on inelastic scattering of photon in light, Dr Vikram Sarabhai in evolving vision space research, Dr MS Swaminathan in bringing to the nation first green revolution and Dr Verghese Kurien in white revolution, Jamshetji Tata for pioneering in steel manufacture and seeding the science institutions IISc have broken the barriers of impossibilities. 

Dear young friends, question is, are you willing to be the unique personality?


Dear friends, Look up, what do you see, the light, the electric bulbs. Immediately, our thoughts go to the inventor Thomas Alva Edison, for his unique contribution towards the invention of electric bulb and his electrical lighting system. 

When you hear the sound of aero plane going over your house, whom do you think of? Wright Brothers proved that man could fly of course at heavy risk and cost.


Whom does the telephone remind you of? Of course, Alexander Graham Bell. 

Do you know an Indian Mathematician who did not have formal higher education but had inexhaustible spirit and love for mathematics which took him to contribute to the treasure houses of mathematical research - some of which are still under serious study and engaging all-available world mathematicians? efforts to establish formal proofs. He was a unique Indian genius who could melt the heart of the most hardened and outstanding Cambridge mathematician Prof G H Hardy. In fact, it is not an exaggeration to say that it was Prof. Hardy who discovered a great mathematician for the world. This mathematician was of-course Srinivasa Ramanujan for whom every number was a divine manifestation. You may all be aware that this year is being celebrated as National Mathematics Year.


Friends, there was a great scientific lady who is known for discovering Radium. She won not one, but two Nobel Prizes, one for physics and another for chemistry. Who is she? She is Madam Curie. Madam Curie discovered radium and she was doing research on the effect of radiation on human system. The same radiation which she discovered, affected her and she sacrificed her life for removing the pain of human life.


Friends, I have, so far, met 15 million youth in India and abroad, in a decade?s time. I learnt, "every youth wants to be unique, that is, YOU! But the world all around you, is doing its best, day and night, to make you just "everybody else".

The challenge, my young friends, is that you have to fight the hardest battle, which any human being can ever imagine to fight; and never stop fighting until you arrive at your destined place, that is, a UNIQUE YOU! Friends what will be your tools to fight this battle. There are four proven steps; having a great aim in life before 20 years of age, acquiring knowledge continuously, hard work towards the aim and perseverance to defeat the problem and succeed.


You have seen young friends, how it is important questioning mind a trait of excellence in thinking and action for entering into scientific research. Now I am going to tell you the present decade you are going to experience what is called convergence of technology influencing multiple fields of human affairs.

Convergence of Technologies

The information technology and communication technology have already converged leading to Information and Communication Technology (ICT). Information Technology combined with bio-technology has led to bio-informatics. Similarly, Photonics is grown out from the labs to converge with classical Electronics and Microelectronics to bring in new high speed options in consumer products. Flexible and unbreakable displays using thin layer of film on transparent polymers have emerged as new symbols of entertainment and media tools. Now, nanotechnology has come in. It is the field of the future that will replace microelectronics and many fields with tremendous application potential in the areas of medicine, electronics and material science.


When Nano technology and ICT meet, integrated silicon electronics, photonics are born and it can be said that material convergence will happen. With material convergence and biotechnology linked, a new science called Intelligent Bioscience will be born which would lead to a disease free, happy and more intelligent human habitat with longevity and high human capabilities. Convergence of bio-nano-info technologies can lead to the development of nano robots.


When Nano robots are injected into a patient, my expert friends say, it will diagnose and deliver the treatment exclusively in the affected area and then the nano-robot gets digested as it is a DNA based product. I saw the product sample in one of the labs in South Korea where best of minds with multiple technology work with a target of finding out of the box solution.


Science is reciprocating: Let me give an example. Recently, I was in the Harvard University where I visited laboratories of many eminent professors from the Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. I recall, how Professor Hongkun Park, showed me his invention of nano needles, which can pierce and deliver content into individual targeted cells. That?s how nano particle sciences is shaping the bio sciences. Then I met Professor Vinod Manoharan, who showed on the other hand bio sciences are in turn shaping nano material science as well. He is using DNA material to design self assembling particles. When particular type of DNA is applied on a particle at the atomic level, he is able to generate a prefixed behavior and automatic assembly from them. This could be our answer to self assembly of devices and colonies in deep space without human intervention as envisioned by Dr K Erik Drexler. Thus, within a single research building, I saw how two different sciences are shaping each other without any iron curtain between the technologists. This reciprocating contribution of sciences to one another is going to shape our future and industry needs to be ready for it. Friends are you ready to bring down the iron curtain existing between various technological groups.


Now, a new trend is emerging. The aspect being introduced is that of Ecology. Globally, the demand is shifting towards development of sustainable systems which are technologically superior. This is the new dimension of the 21st century knowledge society, where science, technology and environment will have to go together. Thus, the new age model would be a four dimensional bio-nano-info-eco based. I am sure the present education system is concentrating to build the curriculum which will emphasis the convergence of technologies and remove the inter-disciplinary barriers.

New Paradigm for Science and Technology

Dear young friends, there are many challenges are going to be thrown on the earth, above the earth and under the earth. Scientists will also have challenges in bringing back a clean environment by replacing fossil fuels with renewable energy from sun, wind and nuclear systems. Some of the future tasks are:

1.	Evolution of clean atmosphere by replacing fossil fuel by cost-effective renewable energy systems, leading to energy independence;

2.	Exploring the human body, particularly gene-characterization through the proteomics project for developing gene-based drugs;

3.	In the area of communication, a big revolution is setting in. High-bandwidth mobile wireless is in the offing. This could result in the mobile phone becoming a convergent system for multi-media applications for meeting the needs of communication in the office, home and on the move.

4.	Particularly for India, having 1 billion plus population, enhancing the food-grain output from the present nearly 230m tonnes to 380m tonnes with reduced land, water and number of people working in the farms through the use of technology could be a role model for the rest of the population in the world

5.	A sustainable Rural Development through provision of urban amenities in rural areas (science and technology as the focus) will need innovation, research leading to products, systems and services in physical, electronic, knowledge leading to economic connectivities. India needs 7000 PURAs covering 600,000 villages where 750 million people live. 

6.	Understanding precursors for phenomena like earth quake and tsunami which damage decades of development and put humanity into misery. Particularly intensive research capacity of multiple scientific areas should lead to forecasting earth quake specified areas at-least one week before. 

7.	Evolution of Unified Field Theory, which may be the ultimate of physics, by revealing how the universe is born and how we are born;

8.	Evolution of an alternate habitat among the system of our galaxy for humanity by the scientific community of today and tomorrow;

9.	Evolution of earth, moon, mars as an economic complex with the focus of establishing space solar power satellite to bring clean power to the earth and material and product transportation to and fro earth and space system. 

These are the some of the major areas of research and innovation, which need the joint research and development efforts in the country and young minds will have great challenges in thinking and actions.

Conclusion

In conclusion, I would like to focus on importance of two great needs: Value to science and scientific magnanimity. I will be explaining these aspects from the great lives of two scientists.

Value to Science: Let me start with an incident about Sir CV Raman - a Nobel Laureate in Physics for discovering Raman Effect. Raman gives the view that the color of sky is blue due to molecular diffraction, which determines the observed luminosity and in great measures also its color. This led to the birth of the Raman Effect. Raman was in the first group of Bharat Ratna Award winners. Bharat Ratna is the highest civilian honour given by the Government of India to the best of human accomplishment. The award ceremony was to take place in the last week of January, soon after the Republic Day celebrations of 1954. The then President Dr. Rajendra Prasad wrote to Sir CV Raman inviting him to be the personal guest in the Rashtrapati Bhavan (the President?s House) at New Delhi, to receive the award. Sir CV Raman wrote a polite letter, regretting his inability to go to Delhi to receive the award. Raman had a noble reason for his inability to attend the investiture ceremony. He explained to the President that he was guiding a Ph.D. student and that the thesis was positively due by the last day of January. The student was valiantly trying to wrap it all up and Raman felt, he had to be by the side of the research student and see that the thesis was finished, sign the thesis as the guide and then have it submitted. Here was a scientist who gave up the pomp of a glittering ceremony associated with the highest honour, because he felt that his duty required him to be by the side of the student. It is this unique trait of giving value to science that builds science.


Scientific Magnanimity: Now, I would like to narrate an incident which took place during a function where Nobel Laureate Prof. Norman E Borlaug, a well known agricultural scientist and a partner in India?s first Green revolution, was conferred with Dr. MS Swaminathan Award, at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi on the 15th of March 2005. Prof. Borlaug, at the age of 91, was in the midst of all the praise showered on him from everybody gathered there. When his turn came, he got up and highlighted India?s advancement in the agricultural science and production and said that the political visionary Shri C. Subramaniam and Dr. MS Swaminathan, pioneer in agricultural science were the prime architects of First Green Revolution in India. Eventhough Prof Norman Borlaug was himself a partner in the first green revolution, he did not make a point on this. He recalled with pride, Dr. Verghese Kurien who ushered White Revolution in India.


Then the surprise came. He turned to scientists sitting in the third row, fifth row and eighth row of the audience. He identified Dr. Raja Ram, a wheat specialist, Dr SK Vasal, a maize specialist, Dr. BR Barwale, a seed specialist. He said, all these scientists had contributed for India?s and Asia?s agricultural science. Dr. Borlaug introduced them to the audience by asking them to stand and ensured that the audience cheered and greeted the scientists with great enthusiasm. This action of Dr. Norman Borlaug, I call it as "Scientific Magnanimity". Friends, if we aspire to achieve great things in life, we need scientific magnanimity to focus the young achievers. It is my experience that great mind and great heart go together. This scientific magnanimity will motivate the scientific community and nurture the spirit of achievement among the young towards science.


With these words, I inaugurate the Children Science Congress at the 100th Indian Science Congress at SN Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Kolkata. My greetings and best wishes to all the young participants success in their mission of scientific inventions and discoveries and make the nation proud. 

May God Bless you.



1.	I realize that I have within me a submerged power. With nurturing thoughts of success, the power within me, will take a shape and rise and rise. Then, definitely I will achieve the success.

2.	I will learn righteousness in the heart through my parents and from my teachers, I will learn with their experiences of knowledge. 

3.	I will work with integrity and succeed with integrity. 

4.	I will create in my mind, the spirit of what can I give - what can I give. Whatever knowledge I gained, I will share with others. I will give my kindness, I will give my culture learnt from experienced. I will respect others and build friendship. 

5.	I will definitely succeed in my life and also equally I will enjoy success of others. 

6.	I will persuade through affection and love, my parents start a home library small in size with quality books. Every day, I will read good books related to my subjects and great human beings. 

7.	Today a great aim what I will be, has born. I will search and search and reach the knowledge and study. I will work hard and sweat. I will not be afraid of problems. I will become the captain of the problems, defeat the problem succeed. 

8.	Smile is a beautiful human ornament. I will wear it and also give the smile to everybody I will meet. 

9.	I will be known in history as a unique personality, particularly in science and technology. 

10.	My national flag flies in my heart and in will bring glory to my nation.
