Imagination results into creativity
Creativity leads to thinking 
Thinking provides knowledge 
Knowledge makes you Great.

I am delighted to participate at the inauguration of Mega Science Fair at Darbhanga by the Hon?ble Shri Nitish Kumarji, Chief Minister of Bihar. My greetings to the Chief Minister, Govt. officials, participating schools, teachers, students and distinguished guests. When I see all you, I am thinking what thoughts I can share with you. Let me share my thoughts on the topic "Mobile Science Laboratories in Bihar". 

Friends, I have a very long association with Bihar through the farmers of Bihar, Hon?ble Members of Bihar Legislative Assembly, and through educational institutions of Bihar, particularly students and teachers.

Prosperity of Bihar

Friends, I am very close to Bihar, particularly I have worked with Shri Nitish Kumarji, when he was Minister of Railways and later as Chief Minister of Bihar, for the last seven years, who is working for development, peace and prosperity of all the citizens of Bihar. I had addressed the Hon?ble Legislative Members of Bihar twice; the recent one was on 15 November 2011. I would like to share a few thoughts with you, dear young friends of Darbhanga, Madhubani and Supaul, I have discussed 7 important missions to the Hon?ble Members of the Legislative Assembly of Bihar. Yesterday, when I addressed IIT Patna convocation, I have particularly asked them to be a partner in 3 important missions: One is using the core competence of each districts of Bihar out of 38 districts, we need to build a competitive industry by encouraging entrepreneurship among the youth; the next one is to work for "flood free and water shortage free Bihar by establishing Smart water ways"; the third one is to build sustainable development systems for establishing 500 PURA Complexes in Bihar using the convergence of multiple technologies.


Friends, I have scene many of the suggested plans taking into different forms of development in Bihar, I am sure, Bihar will transform into economically empowered state with happy citizens of Bihar soon. 

Friends, when I see you young students, teachers and citizens in this gathering on the occasion of inauguration of Mega Science Fair, I would like to share one experience with all of you.

Recent experience at Paravur village near Kochi

Friends, few months back, I was in a village called Paravur near Kochi. I went to the village to inaugurate the programme Sasthrayaan - which means science propagation. During the programme, the President of Paravur Panchayat Board and the local MLA said, that the mission of Sasthrayaan in Paravur is to ensure preparation of 2000 students from different schools towards attaining eligibility for entrance as engineers, scientists, doctors, qualified managers, and Civil services officers. This action will empower 2000 families of the village. My inaugural address to Paravur audience consisting of 5000 students and family members was "Science Empowers the Nation". After my address, there were 100s of hands put-up for asking questions. Due to limited availability of time, I selected 12 students randomly from last row to first row to ask me questions. I would like to share with you two questions of concern asked by the students. One 10th class girl asked me, Mr Kalam next year I have to take the subject for my specialization, I love psychology. My parents say, no to this subject. They want me to take the subject that will enable me to enter a professional course. What should be my answer? I thought of it, I told the student, you have a great tool to win your parents that is love and affection. Similarly your parents also love you. They earn and sometime also borrow for your education and they would like to ensure that you are properly positioned in your professional life. But I respect your dream and definitely I am confident, you can persuade your parents. If any help is needed, I can talk to your parents also.


The next important question was from a 8th class boy called Vishu who had come from a far away village environment from the city. He was nervous and represented the youth in Indian village environment. The boy started with telling his name, "my name is Vishu. I don?t know what should I ask? I am nervous. I have not asked any question in my class. I need to have confidence, I am not gaining confidence through education during the last 7 years. I am afraid to talk to my teachers, I am afraid to talk to my friends. Whenever I talk, I compare myself with other students and their elegant dress. Please tell me Mr Kalam, how can I become a unique person? I want to become a marine engineer. I want to travel in the ship. I want to be the captain of the ship. I want to build the engine for the ship. Will I be able to do all this Mr Kalam? How can I achieve this mission? What I should do?" When the boy completed the question, the whole audience of 5000 people and dignitaries in the dais, including the CM, were looking at me, what Kalam is going to say for such a shivering question. I thought of it, and thought of it, I wanted to break the silence. I said, my dear Vishu, you have put the most difficult question, so far I have received from millions and millions of students whom I have met. Vishu, I value your question, also I consider you are echoing the question of millions of rural students. Then, slowly I gained the confidence to answer. Let us both recite a beautiful ancient poem named "I will fly". I slowly started telling the poem. The boy also started repeating the poem with me.


I will fly
"I am born with potential. 
I am born with goodness and trust. 
I am born with ideas and dreams. 
I am born with greatness.
I am born with confidence. 
I am born with wings. 
So, I am not meant for crawling, 
I have wings, I will fly 
I will fly and fly"


When the boy Vishu finished reciting the poem, he was in tears. He said, he has confidence; he will win and win and ran off. 

These two questions from two students reveal that students are in stress in the choice of their subjects after 10+1 and 10+2 and education is not giving the students the confidence that "I can do it". I am sure, the journalists of Indian Express will use their creative talent to facilitate imbibing of such confidence among the rural students by presenting to them many unique case studies and the role of teachers in developing the spirit of "I can do it". 

I would like to share the life of a great Astronomer Mathematician who belongs to Bihar.

Aryabhata

Aryabhata was both an astronomer and mathematician, born in 476 AD in Kusumapura (now called Patna). He was known to represent a summary of all mathematics at that point of time. Just when he was only 23 years old, he wrote his book ARYABHATIYAM in two parts. He covered important areas like arithmetic, algebra (first ever contributor), trigonometry and astronomy. He gave formulas for the areas of a triangle and a circle and attempted to give the volumes of a sphere and a pyramid. He was the first to give an approximation to ?pi? as the ratio of a circle?s circumference and diameter arriving at the value of 3.1416.


When I was studying the chapter on Rishi scientist, one thought came to me as a student of Science. When Copernicus (15th century) and Galileo (16th century) established the dynamics of solar system that the earth is spherical and orbits around the sun. For this scientific statement to the world, Copernicus was forced to withdraw his statement and Galileo was imprisoned lifetime. Whereas in 500 AD, nearly a millennium before Galileo and Copernicus, Indian astronomer and mathematician Aryabhatta discovered and publicly announced that earth orbits around the sun in about 365 days, the Indian society accepted this scientific wisdom of Aryabhatta and he happily continued to propagate his scientific work. 

Let me share with you a few experiences. I will begin with Shri M.B. Verma.

Serve silently

I have known Shri MB Verma for the last two decades. Mr MB Verma comes from a small village Boar of district Darbhanga. Did his schooling in Darbhanga and Patna and reached the senior most scientist position of Programme Director, Light Combat Aircraft - a state-of-the-art supersonic fighter aircraft. This is the boy who came from a very small village of Bihar and made a successful project. Finally, when the time came for retirement, Vermaji decided to settle down in his home district Darbhanga. Normally, people who work in big cities will choose to settle down in the big cities only. Although Vermaji worked for many decades in Bangalore, after retirement, he decided to work for the people of Bihar. How many of you friends, would like to settle down in your home village, after retirement, like what Vermaji has done. Today, Shri MB Verma is responsible for rural science education through three mobile science laboratories. My gratitude to Shri Vermaji for the services he rendered to the students community of Bihar. The three mobile laboratories have spontaneously attracted students, even teachers, to perform scientific experiments. I understand that some of the students came across crossing rivers and embankments of Kosi in the district of Saharsa and also by walking to participate in this programme.

Mission of mobile science lab in Bihar

The Agastya International Foundation and Viksit Bharat Foundation, Bihar Branch has successfully operated a Mobile Science Lab during April-July 2010. During this campaign the mobile lab visited 14 High Schools and 28 middle schools in the flood affected rural areas of Bihar in the Kosi Kamla-Balan belt. This included six Kasturba Gandhi Girl?s middle schools and Project High schools, run by the state government. With the help of this mobile science lab, the scientific knowledge could be made accessible to nearly fifteen thousand students in these schools. This was highly appreciated by students, teachers and guardians. The feedback and queries were invited from students after completion of the lessons. These were very encouraging. It showed that once interest is raised in the young minds and their curiosity is encouraged the process of learning is fast with amazing results.


Now, there are 3 mobile laboratories. It is indeed beautiful news that 54,000 students in 2100 villages of districts Darbhanga, Madhubani, Supaul have utilized and benefited through 3 mobile science laboratories and 758 teachers have been trained and 200 middle and high schools students have visited. Based on my observation, I have found that it is essential for mobile science laboratories transform into important science education teachers. I have seen this phenomena happening in Bihar. The presence of Hon?ble Chief Minister of Bihar, Shri Nitish Kumar ji, is indeed an important message to all the people of rural villages of Bihar that education, particularly science education will reach the unreached. The mobile science laboratories have become a friend and teacher to many-many villages of Bihar.

Science Lab at Village

On 18 Oct 2012, I visited Agastya International Foundation founded by Ramji Raghavan, a pioneer in Science Lab. In Gudivanka Village (near Kuppam), in the state of Andhra Pradesh, where I inaugurated Guru Graha Astronomy Centre at the Agastya Campus at Kuppam. There, I witnessed the 4 centres of scientific excellence - Vision Works where a number of mechanical systems, scientific instruments and Scientific experiments tools are designed. Next, I visited the Guru Graha Astronomy Center, where I saw the beautiful solar system simulator, where all the planets are orbiting around the sun on mono rail platform - a beautiful way of explaining the functioning of the Solar system; the Orbital Plane was beautifully explained how the Sun, Earth and moon combination systems are working beautifully and scientifically.


Agastya Foundation has reached over 3 million children in more than 10 states in India. Based on their experience in Bihar, the MSL instructors have commented that the rural children of Bihar, with whom they have interacted continuously for over 2 years, have some unique qualities. What makes the children of Bihar unique?


1)	Their tremendous enthusiasm and hunger to learn science measured by their willingness to brave hardships and long distances to visit the MSL.

2)	Scientific spirit and innovative ideas are bubbling in Bihar children. 

3)	Their innate curiosity and questioning spirit. Rural children have demonstrated that they are at par with students from the best schools.

4)	They have the potential to become Young Instructor Leaders - children who can teach and lead other children.

5)	They can become role models not only for children in Bihar but for the rest of India.


The Mobile Science Laboratories visited rural schools during summer with high temperature in the day time. Notwithstanding the holidays, once students in villages were informed about the visit of the MSL, their response was very spontaneous and they came to schools in large numbers to witness scientific experiments. Some of these students came to participate in these programs crossing rivers by boat, between two embankments of the Kosi in the district of Saharsa or by walking for about 8-10 km! The Head masters, members of Teaching Staff and guardians were very enthusiastic and interested in this novel way of demonstrating scientific experiments to children and encouraging their inquisitiveness by close dialogue and interaction with Science Instructors. It was quite evident that given proper ambience for academic work and opportunity for learning, the students in schools were keen to learn. I would like the teachers, principals, parents and the participating students for supporting with high enthusiasm the birth of mobile science laboratories in five districts of Bihar. 

Now let me share with you my visualization on Science Laboratories.

My visualization on Science Laboratories

Friends, I visualize, every science lab or graduated science museums, should be unique. One science lab can have an exhibit on what is God?s particle (Higgs Boson Particle), another laboratory may focus on having a unique virtual lab on how to build a rocket, or how to build a satellite? Another Laboratory in India, should show in real time, how a productivity of rice, wheat or vegetables can be increased more than 3 times that of present. There should be another science lab or museum, which exclusively presents the sustainable development system for rural development and this, can be realized so that many sustainable rural development systems and its working may be demonstrated to the students.


Another unique science laboratory should focus and presents the challenges in bringing together as a Unified Field Theory, particularly integrating laws of Physics and its particles such as Newton?s Gravitational Law, Einstein?s theory of Relativity, Maxwell's equations towards classical electrodynamics. 

Another unique virtual lab should come in on recent CERN?s discovery on Higgs Boson particle, to present the way student can understand. Like this we need to establish unique Virtual labs in the country with collaboration and interaction built in so that students can understand the science behind it by simulating the real time experiments.

Conclusion

Friends, the future challenges of science communication have several dimensions. The value of science has to be propagated to people at large and they should be made to realize the role played by science in their day to day life. Youngsters should be motivated to enquire into science. The innate fear that "science is a difficult subject" should be removed from the minds of the children through easy to understand, interesting, creative presentations by the science communicators. For this to happen we need to establish science museums and laboratories across the country, so that it reaches to the students at the primary and secondary level education, so that the spirit of learning science and applying science with creative minds are possible, which will lead to building a borderless world with the spirit of scientific excellence.


I am sure, the Government of Bihar, in association with Viksit Bharat Foundation and Agastya International Foundation will progress further in establishment of Mobile Science Labs to cover the villages and the Major Scientific Laboratory in every districts and extend full support administratively to reach out to all the schools of Bihar to imbibe the spirit of scientific enquiry among the school students. 

My best wishes to all the participants for success in their mission of meeting the challenges of applying science by understanding science and build a better and prosperous world of tomorrow. 

May God bless you.


Oath for the Students

1.	Science is a life time mission. I will work, work and work and succeed.

2.	Wherever I am, a thought will always come to my mind. That is what process or product I can innovate, invent or discover.

3.	I will always remember that "Let not my winged days, be spent in vain". 

4.	I realize I have to set a great scientific goal that will lead me to think high, work and persevere to realize the goal. 

5.	My greatest friends will be great scientific minds, good teachers and good books and laboratories. 

6.	I firmly believe that no problem can defeat me; I will become the captain of the problem, defeat the problem and succeed. 

7.	I will work and work for removing the problems faced by planet earth in the areas of water, energy, habitat, waste management and environment through the application of science. 

8.	 My National Flag flies in my heart and I will bring glory to my nation.
